aspire-all-students@eecs.berkeley.edu
aspire-all-faculty@eecs.berkeley.edu
eecs-grads@eecs.berkeley.edu
amangulabnan@berkeley.edu
dt27182@gmail.com
richard.lin@berkeley.edu
jssmith@berkeley.edu
ryan.orendorff@berkeley.edu
igormartire@id.uff.br
jq.yang@berkeley.edu
sumukh@berkeley.edu
mfitton@berkeley.edu
jvitor.schneid@gmail.com
sean.lobo@berkeley.edu

Thank you to all who have registered for the Stanza bootcamp! We have
booked a room. The bootcamp will be held in Soda373 at
the following times:

   March 28, Monday: 6:00pm to 7:30pm
   March 30, Wednesday: 6:00pm to 7:30pm
   April 1, Friday: 3:00pm to 4:30pm
   April 4, Monday: 6:00pm to 7:30pm
   April 6, Wednesday: 6:00pm to 7:30pm
   April 8, Friday: 3:00pm to 4:30pm   

Please remember to bring a laptop with a unix system installed to code
along (either OS-X or Linux). Looking forward to seeing you there!

  - Patrick and Jonathan


               ==================================
                Functional Programming in Stanza
                        March 28, 2016
               ==================================            

On March 28, we will be starting the second course on teaching
functional programming using the Stanza programming language and
invite all who are interested to come!

Functional programming is beginning to be recognized as an extremely
productive programming paradigm, promising the ability to write bigger
programs with less code and less bugs. But the available functional
languages are intimidating in their complexity. If you've found
yourself curious about all the recent buzz surrounding functional
programming, but was intimidated by the steep learning curves of ML,
Haskell, or Scala, then consider trying out Stanza.

Stanza is a new general-purpose programming language designed by
Patrick S. Li, from Jonathan Bachrach's group in Berkeley, and aims to
be the world's most productive programming language for the entire
product development lifecycle. With Stanza, we intend for
users to be able to explore their domain space, rapidly develop
initial prototypes, and evolve their prototypes into stable robust
products, all within the same language. This is made possible by two
important technical innovations: a novel optional type system that
bridges the gap between dynamically typed scripting languages (like
Python/Ruby/Javascript) and statically typed production languages
(like Java/C++), and a novel multimethod based object system that
enables users to seamlessly blend traditional object oriented
programming with functional programming paradigms. Mostly importantly,
Stanza is designed to be easy and fun to learn.

The course will consist of 6 sessions of 1.5 hour hands-on lectures
spread across 2 weeks. Participants are encouraged to bring a laptop
with a unix-based operating system and code along. We will cover
functional programming, how to architect programs using types and
multimethods, coroutines, macros, as well as some of Stanza's more
advanced features.

You should come check it out if any of the following applies to you:

   - You program predominantly in a scripting language
     (eg. Ruby/Python/Javascript) and are increasingly annoyed by the
     amount of time wasted chasing down silly typos and mistakes.

   - You program predominantly in a production language (eg. Java) and
     are annoyed at your lack of productivity, and have the hazy
     feeling that "you can think faster than your language". 

   - You find that none of the existing languages are as productive as
     you would like and are looking for alternatives.

   - You're curious about functional programming but it has always
     seemed too hard to learn.

   - You're a language geek like me, and want to take part in bringing
     up and pushing a new open source programming language out into
     the world.

Please RSVP at http://when2meet.com/?4570611-xAv64 if you're
interested in coming, so that we may book an appropriate room. And
please forward this message to anyone you think may be interested.

Hope to see you there!
  - Patrick and Jonathan


